This is a well-written chapter; it’s technical without being alienating for
readers with little or average knowledge of digital technologies; it offers a
structured and comprehensive report on an innovative digital platform for
dissemination and collaborative editing of data. It is fascinating to read how
different new technologies are meaningfully combined in one resource, serving
a community of researchers with common research interests and data. The
chapter addresses also (if only parenthetical) a complex set of issues
relating to the evolution of established Classics research methods and
scholarly activities (like the collection of metadata about ancient documents
or the transcription of primary sources) in the digital age. The decision to
focus on technical aspects of SoSOL (especially the choice and implementation
of a Distributed Version Control System) seems justifiable, since this is a
technological innovation for humanities research that opens new perspectives
for e-research in the humanities in general (and not only Digital Classics).

I am bit concerned that readers, who have little or no knowledge of the
peculiarities of ancient documentary material and the projects combined into
SoSOL, might find it difficult to understand why the specific technical
solution was necessary, or, in other terms, why versioning à la Git is central
for SoSOL. This can easily be achieved with a couple of references; I found
for instance the information provided by R. Bagnall (Bagnall, 2010) (an
earlier announcement about SoSOL) very useful in this respect. One further
possibility would be to describe how Git handles user commits (p. 6) with real
SoSOL data/examples instead of a fictional project.

In general, the Chapter does not draw connecting lines to thoughts on the
future of humanities research expressed by others; what immediately springs to
mind are Greg Crane’s ideas and visions introduced in a series of articles
with  (Gregory Crane, 2010) being a more or less direct response to R.
Bagnall’s article mentioned above and (G Crane & Rydberg-Cox, 2000) being an
earlier article where the concept of “corpus editors”, a new breed of
humanities researchers with advanced technical skills, is being introduced.
SoSOL appears to have such editors, who operate in the background performing
the tasks described in p. 11, tune the whole system up and create tools
meeting the needs of users (members of the “community”).  It would add value
to the chapter as a report aiming at a broader adoption of the solutions
described herein  to know more about the training and the background of the
system’s architects and administrators. The same applies to information about
the necessary hardware infrastructure needed and the overall costs involved in
putting up and maintaining such a system.

There is one further area where additional information would be welcome: who
are the members of the SoSOL community? Are there now more “active scholars
who care to participate” because such an advanced electronic platform is
available? Is SoSOL being used outside research institutions and universities
by enthousiasts and lay experts? How about the geographical distribution of
SoSOL users? This information is, in my view, necessary in order to fully
understand the consequences of the reported transition from individual
research projects to a “papyrological community”.

I am personally rather sceptical when reading statements about the “rigidity
and implied authority of print publications”; whether the DDbDP and for that
matter any other comparable resource is or is not a fixed resource is not in
my view a matter of medium (print vs digital) but a matter of research
methodology and theoretical framework underlying the interpretation of the
data modelled and represented within the resource. What I mean is this: Are we
describing the corpus of documentary papyri as a “collection of conjectures”
because the data as such can only be approached in this way (are, for
instance, multiple parallel transcriptions of individual papyri allowed in the
canonical data repository, giving room to subjective interpretations by
individual scholars, or is there only one, more or less fixed, transcription
allowed at a time? Are the data “constantly changing” because the resources
are constantly enhanced and improved or because the data are fluid and each
transcription or similar activity comes to different results?) or simply
because it is now technically possible to record meaningful and meaningless
changes without friction and the cost involved in printing addenda et
corrigenda every other month? Correcting and improving existing editions and
transcriptions of ancient documents and texts is a scholarly activity
performed for centuries. It can now be done more effectively, but is it being
done in a different way, because of the digital tools available?

A few clarification questions: what happens if the editorial board does not
approve the changes committed by users?  since work is not assigned to users
in an organized way, how is reduplication of labour avoided (two users editing
the same document)?  Apparently Git records all changes to the documents, even
trivial ones, as soon as they are committed to the system. Doesn’t this raise
the signal-to-noise ratio for everyone who wants to make sense of the changes?
(some information about this issue is given in p. 11, I would personally want
to know more about how this problem is dealt with)

Let me add, as a final remark, that the above points of criticism do not alter
my overall assessment of this chapter as being an excellent contribution of a
kind that is needed in order to get Classicists and humanities researchers in
general thinking about possibilities and perspectives of using such advanced
collaborative tools like those described here.


Bagnall, R. (2010). Integrating Digital Papyrology. “Online Humanities
Scholarship: The Shape of Things to Come&quot; a three-day, Mellon Foundation
Conference at the University of Virginia to explore how to develop and sustain
online humanities research and publication, March 26-28, 2010”: Retrieved
April 26, 2011, from http://archive.nyu.edu/handle/2451/29592.

Crane, G, & Rydberg-Cox, J. A. (2000). New technology and new roles: the need
for “corpus editors.” Proceedings of the fifth {ACM} conference on Digital
libraries (pp. 252-253). {ACM} New York, {NY,} {USA}.

Crane, Gregory. (2010). Give us Editors! Re-inventing the Edition and
Re-Thinking the Humanities. Connexions, (May 14), 1-17. Retrieved from
http://cnx.org/content/m34316/1.2/.

